Aim :-

The aim of this visualization is to help learners understand how Dynamic Programming on Trees solves the House Robber III / Maximum Reward problem by calculating the optimal rob/skip decision for every subtree and combining these results to obtain the global maximum.

This simulator enables users to:

Visualize the binary tree and its subtrees.
Observe how each subtree calculates a rob value and a skip value.
Understand how parent-child restrictions affect the selection of nodes.
Interactively trace the Dynamic Programming states of each node.
Observe how the rob/skip pair is passed upward from child nodes to their parent.
Understand how the root combines the results of its subtrees to determine the global optimum.
Learn how Tree DP efficiently solves optimization problems on hierarchical structures.

This visualization is ideal for learners exploring Dynamic Programming on Trees, binary tree optimization, subtree-based state computation, and interview-oriented problems such as House Robber III.


Theory :-

Definition:House Robber III / Maximum Reward on a Tree is a Dynamic Programming problem where the objective is to select a set of nodes with maximum total value such that no selected node is directly connected to another selected node. The problem is solved by computing two states for every subtree: the maximum value when the current node is skipped and the maximum value when the current node is robbed or selected.

Working Principle:The algorithm performs Dynamic Programming on the tree using a rob/skip pair for every node. Each subtree returns its two computed values to its parent, and the parent combines these values to determine the optimal result for its own subtree.

Skip State:If the current node is skipped, either the left child or right child may be selected or skipped. Therefore, the maximum possible value from each child subtree is considered.

Rob State:If the current node is selected, its immediate children cannot be selected. Therefore, only the skip value of each child subtree is added to the current node's value.

For a node u:

skip[u] = max(skip[left], rob[left]) + max(skip[right], rob[right])

rob[u] = value[u] + skip[left] + skip[right]

The final answer is:

max(skip[root], rob[root])

This allows every subtree to return a compact rob/skip pair upward, and the root combines these values to obtain the global optimal solution.

Precondition:
The input must represent a valid binary tree.
Each node must contain a value representing its reward or amount.
The tree may be empty, balanced, skewed, or incomplete.
Adjacent parent and child nodes cannot both be selected.

Advantages
Efficiently solves maximum-selection problems on hierarchical tree structures.
Uses only two Dynamic Programming states for each node.
Avoids repeatedly solving the same subtree problems.
Demonstrates the practical use of bottom-up Tree DP.
Works for balanced as well as highly skewed binary trees.
The rob/skip state makes the parent-child restriction easy to handle.

Disadvantages
Requires additional memory for storing Dynamic Programming states.
The tree must be traversed completely to calculate the optimal result.
The state transition becomes more complex than simple tree traversal.
For very deep trees, recursive implementations may require additional stack space.

Time Complexity : O(n)
(Each node is visited exactly once and its rob/skip states are computed in constant time.)

Space Complexity :
O(n) for storing the tree and Dynamic Programming states.
O(h) additional space for recursive traversal, where h is the height of the tree.